#LyX 1.6.7 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 345
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass paper
\use_default_options true
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\paperfontsize 12
\spacing onehalf
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered true
\pdf_bookmarksopen true
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder false
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\leftmargin 2cm
\topmargin 2cm
\rightmargin 2cm
\bottommargin 2cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\author "" 
\author "" 
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Flexim: Facilitating User-Friendly Cycle-Accurate Simulation of Multicore
 Processors
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Min Cai, Zhimin Gu
\end_layout

\begin_layout Institution
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P.R.China
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Good cycle-accurate simulators are critical for conducting successful multicore
 processor architecture research nowadays.
 However, most of the existing simulators are written in C or C++ for speed
 considerations and the modeled computer structures and functionalities
 are too complicated to be implemented in a clear yet efficient way.
 The resulting unreadable code makes the simulator hard to use and extend.
 As a niche market, other not-so-realistic simulators are mostly used for
 educational and visualization purposes that they are written in traditional
 object-oriented languages such as Java or C#, which omit many machine details
 that are necessary for architectural study.
 There is a permanent need of balancing speed and elegance while simulating
 multicore architectures.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
In this paper, we present Flexim, a user-friendly cycle-accurate multicore
 architectural simulator, which consists of the simulator core and the GUI
 based Integrated Simulation Environment (ISE) .
 Within the core, Flexim remodels the core functionalities of the classic
 SimpleScalar simulator and extends it to enable configurable timing simulation
 of out-of-order cores and multi-level cache hierarchies of multicore processors.
 It exploits interface-based hierarchical modularity and cycle-accurate
 callback-based eventing to improve the modularity and extensibility of
 the simulator core.
 For the GUI-based ISE, Flexim uses XML files and setup wizards to ease
 the configuration of the simulator, and utilizes graph visualization to
 provide static and dynamic views of the multicore architecture under simulation.
 Simulations of a few popular benchmark suites such as Olden and CPU2006
 are shown for illustrative purposes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Keywords
Cycle-accurate simulator, multicore processor architecture, integrated simulatio
n environment
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
